**_Important Note:_** This page will be updated to include the download commands once the data is publicly available


## 2.1. Genotyping data
1.  The [GRLS genotyping data](https://github.com/morrisanimalfoundation/grGWAS/blob/main/GRLS_Axiom.json) is available in binary PLINK file format for each of two Axiom array sets A and B. You may use the [PLINK documentation](https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/1.9/input#bed) to read more about this file format. In this tutorial, the data was downloaded to the working directory where:
    - The files of array A have the prefix `output/setA/export_plink/AxiomGT1.bin`
    - The files of array B have the prefix `output/setB/export_plink/AxiomGT1.bin`


    ---
    **_Note:_** These PLINK files have the gender as predicted by the Axiom genotyping analysis tools which was not always consistent with the gender in the dog records. Check the [genotyping analysis notes](https://github.com/morrisanimalfoundation/grGWAS/raw/main/Genotyping_Analysis_Notes.docx) for details

    ---

2.  A text file that maps between sample IDs in the genotyping files, biological sample IDs and the public IDs used in phenotype data files. The file includes gender information of the dogs as reported by their owners: `map_id_sex.tab`


    Here is a sample of the file:

    | Family_ID | replicate_id   | public_id    | Sex  |
    | --------- | -------------- | ------------ | ---- |
    | GRLS      | grlsT459F8JJ_1 | grlsT459F8JJ | 1    |
    | GRLS      | grls9ZOSMBXX_1 | grls9ZOSMBXX | 2    |
    | GRLS      | grls9ZOSMBXX_2 | grls9ZOSMBXX | 2    |
    | GRLS      | grls9ZOSMBXX_3 | grls9ZOSMBXX | 2    |
    | PILOT     | grls1US5SPBB_1 | grls1US5SPBB | 1    |
    | Oldies    | grlsa5561a48_1 | grlsa5561a48 | 2    |


    *Notes:*
    1.  There are 3 posssible variants of "Family_ID": PILOT ids, a small subset of the longitudinal GRLS population that were used as a proof of concept study. GRLS ids, the remainder of the GRLS cohort. And Oldies ids,  200 golden retrievers from the Golden Oldies substudy. See the [GRLS genotyping data description](https://github.com/morrisanimalfoundation/grGWAS/blob/main/GRLS_Axiom.json) for details.
    2.  One sample (e.g. grls9ZOSMBXX) may have multiple duplicates in the genotyping files (e.g. grls9ZOSMBXX_1, grls9ZOSMBXX_2, grls9ZOSMBXX_3)
    3.  Sex is encoded where 1 is male and 2 is female.

<br>

## 2.2. Phenotype data
In this tutorial, we are using the [Conditions - Skin](https://datacommons.morrisanimalfoundation.org/artisanal_dataset/91) dataset as an example. The phenotype table was downloaded locally as `phenotypes/conditions_skin.csv`.

<br>
